Should be led by manager in the sense that it is a way to get perspective
 - explain the purpose of the 1 on 1 meeting (uncover potential issues, what's on mind, on same page)

The best way to ensure they are engaged is to get feedback on length, focus and cadence of meeting

Mindset:
 - Information Gathering: Listen, show we are paying attention, write things down
 - Uncover potential issues, not judgement
 - Empower them to come to me early

Write Things Down as you Have these

Remote 1:1
 - personal connection, heed off loneliness
 - How is your energy level these days, music, watching, cook anything, podcasts
 - This is not status update
 - Ask about their remote work environment itself
   - clear what needs to be done, level of quality that's required clear
   - am i being respectful of time
   - do you have tools and resources to get things done
   - when you do feel like you get the best work done
   - what part of work do you feel stuck at

Feedback
 - anything that has irked you wrong way about my management style

Company Team Outlook
 - how do you feel about direction, transparency
 - what can we communicate more often and transparency, to help reduce anxiety around team's/company's future 
 - what are the things that need/could change or need to continue
 
 For when there is something that is related to red-tape that you can't change
 - be empathetic and have candor at the same time
 
What happens when you are more busy:
 - remember it is a conversation with a person
 - it will help the team

1:1 Questions Master List
--Updated May 21, 2021--

### Questions

#### Feedback
 - Have I been putting too much on your plate and do you need some breathing room?
 - What do you find challenging about my management style?
 - How do you prefer to receive feedback?
 - When have you been annoyed, peeved, or bothered by me and something I’ve done?
 - What do you appreciate about my management style?
 - Do you like time to think something over, or do you prefer to talk about it right away?
 - Is there anything you feel like you might be a little more particular about than most?
 - What can I do better support you?
 - Am I giving you enough information to do your job well?
 - Have I not been as cognizant of reasonable timelines, like I should have?
 - Are you a morning, afternoon, or a night person?
 - How many hours a day do you feel you’re productive? How could we help you feel more focused?
 - Would you like more or less direction from me? Why/why not?
 - What’s a recent situation you wish you handled differently? What would you change?
 - What aspect of my work do you think I can do a better job?
 - Do you think I've been a little micromanaging with how I've been following up on projects?
 - Am I interrupting you too much during the day with meetings and requests?
 - Could I be doing a better job outlining the vision and direction for where we're headed?
 - When do you not like to be interrupted during the day?
 - Would you like more or less feedback on your work? Why/why not?
 - What aspect of your job you would like more help or coaching?

#### Issues
 - When have you felt most “in flow” or “in control”of what you’re doing during the past week or so?
 - Are you working on a project that you feel like has gone on too long?
 - When have you been disappointed with a decision or the direction that the company has gone in the past quarter?
 - Do you feel like customers directly benefited from the work you did this week?
 - When have you felt most motivated about the work you’ve been doing?
 - Do you think we’re doing our best work right now?
 - What are your biggest time wasters?
 - Is there any red tape you’d like to cut at the company?
 - What would need to change for this place to feel like it's the best place you’ve ever worked?
 - When have you been frustrated in the past few weeks?
 - Is there anything you worked on recently that you wish you could do over?
 - Do you feel you get to interact with other coworkers and other parts of the company as much as you'd like to?
 - When have you felt dejected or demoralized in the past few weeks?
 - As a company, do you think we’re behind the curve on anything in particular?
 - Is anything holding you back from doing the best work you can do right now?
 - What rumors are you hearing that you think I should know about?
 - When have you felt stressed or overworked in the past quarter?
 - Do you wish you could be working on a different project right now?
 - Do you feel like you’re spread too thin right now?
 - Are you being forced to do something that you think is a waste of time?
 - When have you felt most proud about being a part of the company this past year?
 - When have you felt excited about what you’ve been working on in the past few weeks?
 - What are you worried about right now, if anything?
 - Are there any decisions you’re hung up on?
 - When have you felt bored in the past quarter? How can I create situations going forward so you don’t feel that way?

#### Career Direction
 - Have you noticed other companies doing anything around career development?
 - Do you feel stuck in your career progression at all?
 - What’s one thing we could do today to help you with your long term goals?
 - Is there anyone at the company you'd like to apprentice under?
 - If you could design your ideal role in a company, what would it look like?
 - Is there an area outside your current role where you feel you could be contributing?
 - What have you been wanting to learn more of, get better at, and improve on?
 - Where do you see yourself professionally five years from now?
 - If you could be proud of one accomplishment between now and next year, what would it be?

#### Personal Connection
 - Seen any good movies lately you’d recommend?
 - Do you have any pets?
 - What’s your favorite place you’ve ever visited?
 - What was your first job?
 - Been anywhere recently for the first time?
 - What are you reading right now?
 - Where did you grow up?
 - Who’s someone you really admire?
 - Any recent advice you've ever heard?
 - What’s something you want to do in the next year that you’ve never done before?
 - Buy anything recently that you'd recommend?
 - Have you met anyone famous?
 - If you could pick up a new skill in an instant what would it be?

#### Other
 - What do you value most in a coworker?
 - How do you feel about how long these one-on-one meetings tend to be?
 - Who in the organization do you admire, and why?
 - How do you feel about the frequency of these one-on-one meetings?