Javascript/FunctionalLightJS/notes.md, before:

## What is Functional Programming

 - Modeling your program in a way that functions define the architecture

## Why Functional Programming

 - Can be Easier to understand
 - Lets use concepts that are provable, trustworthy and understandable
 - Less to Read if you can trust
 
## Definitions
 - Impurity - 
 - Point Free Style - Doing your best to not pass arguments that are solely forwarded to another function.
 - Excapsulation - Hiding details in a facade
 - Abstraction - Creating appropriate layers of separation so that we can reason about each piece (20:00)
 - Pure - No side effects
 - Predicate Function - returns true/false
 - Higher Order Function - Takes or returns a function

## What is a function
 - Must have a return value (no return is a procedure)
 - Uses inputs to determine output value

## Impurity
 - Side effects bad because it makes a line hard to predict outside of the context of all other lines
 - Impurity optimizes for *writing* and makes it harder for *reading* because you need much more context to understand and run
 - Look at both uses of variables not passed as argument or things that affect 'outside'
  
## Purity
 - Idempotent
 - Makes it easier to debug.  The bug will most likely be in your side effect code.  
 - Importance is in observability *not* academically, meaning that what matters is that all side effects are encapsulated in the function and have no affect outside
 - In a mutable language like JS, it is just a 'level' of confidence of purity

## Arguments
 - unary => 1 argument
 - binary => 2 arguments
 - n'ary => many
 
```
function unary(fn) {
  return function one(arg) {
    return fn(arg);
  }
}

function binary(fn) {
  return function two(arg1, arg2) {
    return fn(arg1, arg2);
  }
}

function f(...args) { console.log(args) }

var g = unary(f);
var h = binary(f);

g(1,2,3,4); //[1]
h(1,2,3,4); //[1,2]

// implementing call
``` 
 
## Point Free Style
 - defining function arguments using functional composition instead of explicitly mapping
 
``` 
//not pointfree cause we receive args
var initials = function(name) {
  return name.split(' ').map(compose(toUpperCase, head)).join('. ');
};

//pointfree
var initials = compose(join('. '), map(compose(toUpperCase, head)), split(' '));

initials("hunter stockton thompson");
// 'H. S. T'
``` 

### Example 1
```
function bar(v) {
  console.log(v);
}

function foo(func) {
  return function(v) {
    func(v);
  }
}

// these two are the same
foo(function(v){ return bar(v) })(4);
foo(bar)(4)
```

### Example 2
```
function isOdd(v) {
  return v % 2 == 1;
}

function isEven(v) {
  return !isOdd(v);
}

isEven(4)
// There is a point where isevent passes to isOdd


// Without Points in our code
function not(fn) {
  return function negated(...args) {
    return !fn(...args)
  }
}

var isEven = not(isOdd)

```

### Are these Pure?


```
const y = 1;
function foo(x) { return x + y }
foo(1);
```
Observably, yes, foo will always produce the same output given an input.


```
function foo(x) { return bar(x) }
function bar(y) { return y + 1 }

foo(1)
```
Bar is pure => given an input it will always produce another output
Foo is pure => it is obserably pure, but it does reference something external

```
function foo(bar) {
  return function(x) {
    return bar(x);
  }
}

foo(function(v) {
  return v * 2;
})(3);
```
both pure

```
function getId(obj) { return obj.id }

getId({
  get id() { return Math.random() }
})
```
no

# Composition

pipe vs compose => pipe is apply left to right, compose right to left

Good Quote: The point of wrapping in a function is to create a boundary between the what and the how.  

# Immutability

constant -> the variable itself cannot be reassigned
functional programmers generally mean value immutability
`Object.freeze` => Read only, shallow only works on top level

# Closure

Me: Having access to the parents activation record, lexically.  It is what allows things like currying/partial applicaton.
Kyles Definition: A function "remembers" the variables arount it even when the function is executed elsewhere.

# Referential Transparency

A function can be replaced with it's return value and not affect the rest of the system.
Best definition of function purity.

```
// Example of failed referential transparency, we cannot replace this utilities usage in the system with it's value, b/c it changes
function foo(x,y) {
  var id = 0;
  return function() { return id++ }
}
```

# Partial Application and Currying

Process of turning a general function into a more specific one

Me: Similar in that they both return functions that accept more arguments that will be applied
    Different in that currying only takes 1 argument at a time
    
Kyle: Techniques for specializing a generalized function
      Partial application takes all now and the rest later, currying is 1 at a time    

# Recursive CPS Continuation Passing Style

Instead of passing a value around, you pass a function that will eval.  Defers all of the work until the very end.
```
var sumRecur = (function() {
  return function(...nums) {
    return recur(nums, v => v);
  }

  function recur([sum, ...nums], cont) {
    if (nums.length == 0) return cont(sum);
    return recur(nums, function(v) {
      return cont(sum + v);
    })
  }
}());

// Walkthrough of stack, it is the final call up that does the summing by continuing
sumRecur(3,4,5)
recur([3,4,5], v=>v)
  sum 3
  nums [4,5]
  return recur([4,5], func(v) { return cont(3 + v)})
    sum 4
    nums [5]
    return recur([5], func(v) { return cont(4 + v)})
      sum 5
      nums []
      return cont(5)
        // return cont(4 + 5)
        //   return cont(3 + 9)
```

# Array / Collections
 - Map 
  -> When you apply this you 'lift' the values
  -> can be collection of functions and lift those to compose functions or a collection of results
  -> must be pure, so you could spin off a thread per element and assemble the new collection
 - Filter
  -> exclusion vs inclusion -> when you put spaghetti noodles through a strainer do you filter out the water or filter in the noodles?
  -> programming always looks at it as inclusion, kyle creates filterIn and filterOut functions to be clear
 - Reduction 

# Fusion
 - combining multiple congruent (same input/output) maps into a single step to run a single time across each element on a list 
```
arr.map(add2).map(mul3).map(sub1)

comp = pipe(add2, mul3, sub1)
arr.map(comp)
```

 
# Definitions
 - Constant, function that accepts a value and returns a function which will return the value function(v){ return function() { return v }}
 - Lift, applying a map to a collection

Commit message:

Add todo to rewatch 8.8 for transducing

Javascript/FunctionalLightJS/notes.md, after:

## What is Functional Programming

 - Modeling your program in a way that functions define the architecture

## Why Functional Programming

 - Can be Easier to understand
 - Lets use concepts that are provable, trustworthy and understandable
 - Less to Read if you can trust
 
## Definitions
 - Impurity - 
 - Point Free Style - Doing your best to not pass arguments that are solely forwarded to another function.
 - Excapsulation - Hiding details in a facade
 - Abstraction - Creating appropriate layers of separation so that we can reason about each piece (20:00)
 - Pure - No side effects
 - Predicate Function - returns true/false
 - Higher Order Function - Takes or returns a function

## What is a function
 - Must have a return value (no return is a procedure)
 - Uses inputs to determine output value

## Impurity
 - Side effects bad because it makes a line hard to predict outside of the context of all other lines
 - Impurity optimizes for *writing* and makes it harder for *reading* because you need much more context to understand and run
 - Look at both uses of variables not passed as argument or things that affect 'outside'
  
## Purity
 - Idempotent
 - Makes it easier to debug.  The bug will most likely be in your side effect code.  
 - Importance is in observability *not* academically, meaning that what matters is that all side effects are encapsulated in the function and have no affect outside
 - In a mutable language like JS, it is just a 'level' of confidence of purity

## Arguments
 - unary => 1 argument
 - binary => 2 arguments
 - n'ary => many
 
```
function unary(fn) {
  return function one(arg) {
    return fn(arg);
  }
}

function binary(fn) {
  return function two(arg1, arg2) {
    return fn(arg1, arg2);
  }
}

function f(...args) { console.log(args) }

var g = unary(f);
var h = binary(f);

g(1,2,3,4); //[1]
h(1,2,3,4); //[1,2]

// implementing call
``` 
 
## Point Free Style
 - defining function arguments using functional composition instead of explicitly mapping
 
``` 
//not pointfree cause we receive args
var initials = function(name) {
  return name.split(' ').map(compose(toUpperCase, head)).join('. ');
};

//pointfree
var initials = compose(join('. '), map(compose(toUpperCase, head)), split(' '));

initials("hunter stockton thompson");
// 'H. S. T'
``` 

### Example 1
```
function bar(v) {
  console.log(v);
}

function foo(func) {
  return function(v) {
    func(v);
  }
}

// these two are the same
foo(function(v){ return bar(v) })(4);
foo(bar)(4)
```

### Example 2
```
function isOdd(v) {
  return v % 2 == 1;
}

function isEven(v) {
  return !isOdd(v);
}

isEven(4)
// There is a point where isevent passes to isOdd


// Without Points in our code
function not(fn) {
  return function negated(...args) {
    return !fn(...args)
  }
}

var isEven = not(isOdd)

```

### Are these Pure?


```
const y = 1;
function foo(x) { return x + y }
foo(1);
```
Observably, yes, foo will always produce the same output given an input.


```
function foo(x) { return bar(x) }
function bar(y) { return y + 1 }

foo(1)
```
Bar is pure => given an input it will always produce another output
Foo is pure => it is obserably pure, but it does reference something external

```
function foo(bar) {
  return function(x) {
    return bar(x);
  }
}

foo(function(v) {
  return v * 2;
})(3);
```
both pure

```
function getId(obj) { return obj.id }

getId({
  get id() { return Math.random() }
})
```
no

# Composition

pipe vs compose => pipe is apply left to right, compose right to left

Good Quote: The point of wrapping in a function is to create a boundary between the what and the how.  

# Immutability

constant -> the variable itself cannot be reassigned
functional programmers generally mean value immutability
`Object.freeze` => Read only, shallow only works on top level

# Closure

Me: Having access to the parents activation record, lexically.  It is what allows things like currying/partial applicaton.
Kyles Definition: A function "remembers" the variables arount it even when the function is executed elsewhere.

# Referential Transparency

A function can be replaced with it's return value and not affect the rest of the system.
Best definition of function purity.

```
// Example of failed referential transparency, we cannot replace this utilities usage in the system with it's value, b/c it changes
function foo(x,y) {
  var id = 0;
  return function() { return id++ }
}
```

# Partial Application and Currying

Process of turning a general function into a more specific one

Me: Similar in that they both return functions that accept more arguments that will be applied
    Different in that currying only takes 1 argument at a time
    
Kyle: Techniques for specializing a generalized function
      Partial application takes all now and the rest later, currying is 1 at a time    

# Recursive CPS Continuation Passing Style

Instead of passing a value around, you pass a function that will eval.  Defers all of the work until the very end.
```
var sumRecur = (function() {
  return function(...nums) {
    return recur(nums, v => v);
  }

  function recur([sum, ...nums], cont) {
    if (nums.length == 0) return cont(sum);
    return recur(nums, function(v) {
      return cont(sum + v);
    })
  }
}());

// Walkthrough of stack, it is the final call up that does the summing by continuing
sumRecur(3,4,5)
recur([3,4,5], v=>v)
  sum 3
  nums [4,5]
  return recur([4,5], func(v) { return cont(3 + v)})
    sum 4
    nums [5]
    return recur([5], func(v) { return cont(4 + v)})
      sum 5
      nums []
      return cont(5)
        // return cont(4 + 5)
        //   return cont(3 + 9)
```

# Array / Collections
 - Map 
  -> When you apply this you 'lift' the values
  -> can be collection of functions and lift those to compose functions or a collection of results
  -> must be pure, so you could spin off a thread per element and assemble the new collection
 - Filter
  -> exclusion vs inclusion -> when you put spaghetti noodles through a strainer do you filter out the water or filter in the noodles?
  -> programming always looks at it as inclusion, kyle creates filterIn and filterOut functions to be clear
 - Reduction 

# Fusion
 - combining multiple congruent (same input/output) maps into a single step to run a single time across each element on a list 
```
arr.map(add2).map(mul3).map(sub1)

comp = pipe(add2, mul3, sub1)
arr.map(comp)
```

# Transducing
 - A way to make functions with separate interfaces that can work together
 - ... TODO watch again in future when brain is bigger (8.8)
```
 function isOdd(v) { return v % 2 === 1 }
 function add1(v) { return v + 1 }
 function sum(total, v) { return total + v }
 
 
 var list = [1,2,3,4]
 list
   .map(add1)
   .filter(isOdd)
   .reduce(sum)
 ```

 
# Definitions
 - Constant, function that accepts a value and returns a function which will return the value function(v){ return function() { return v }}
 - Lift, applying a map to a collection
